# Chess-Game
Introduction: The project implements a human player against a computer player chess game. This project will explain the evaluation function implemented, how the system was designed and how a game is to be played. The computer player uses alpha-beta pruning in a minimax algorithm to decide on a move. The algorithm only goes to a certain depth and an evaluation function is implemented. The human player is allowed to input any legal moves for his own chess pieces.  

Design of System: A Pieces class is used to represent the traits associated with a char piece of a board, including its worth. Boolean function isPawnPromoted notes when a pawn is in a position to be promoted. Boolean functions isPawnPromotedtoQueen, isPawnPromotedtoKnight, isPawnPromotedtoRook, isPawnPromotedtoBishop is helpful in keeping track of what it has been promoted to, especially in alpha-beta pruning where a pawn can promoted to several pieces when making board moves (to form children boards) from a parent board. Boolean function isCastling checks that if the castling move is to be made to a board, then two sets of positions change have to occur. Both the Boolean functions isCastling and hasCastled help in the board evaluation since this chess move is considered a safe strategy. Boolean function hasMoved helps to note if a chess piece has been moved, even if it is in its original position on the board (useful when checking if castling is possible). The second constructor is used when keeping a list of Pieces objects with its possible moves that can be made with chess pieces.    

ChessMoves.java: Function board_iteration: In the chess engine, a board, which stores a Pieces object for each square on it, along with the colour of the side whose turn it is and an array of last moves that led to this board is used (the last one does not happen in the situation where a specific board setup is taken as it would be empty). A board iteration function, receiving all these as parameters, is used to get to every piece of the colour and find all the possible moves (initial position to final position) it can make including any possible capture of the opponent’s pieces. The positions each piece can move to or the directions in which each can move into are used. The function keeps track of which colour’s turn it is, since for some moves such as pawn move, pawn promotion and en passant, there is a difference in whether the motion is from up towards down, or going up from down. For castling, the piece moves occur either at the top of the board or the bottom. This special move is called upon after the board iteration since it involves two different chess pieces. For every possible move of a piece, a boolean function, check_king, is called to ensure that the move does not put the king into check. A list of Pieces objects containing chess pieces and their possible moves is given as an output. It also has Boolean functions that check for the possibility of a stalemate and checkmate for after every new board iteration as it depends on whether or not a list of legal moves can be made at the player’s turn. A Boolean function for draw calls for another board iteration and checks for the instances (a specific set of chess pieces left on a board) where the game can be considered as a draw (these boolean functions are implemented in the main program: ChessPlay.java). 

ChessMoves.java contains the board iteration function (chess engine) and the board evaluation.    

In ChessPlay.java: Function minimaxPruned: Alpha-beta pruning is an improved version of the minimax algorithm whereby not all possible board configurations are considered. They get cut off. For every turn of the computer player, the function is called to find the best possible move to be made by the player. The search only goes down to a certain depth level, which is where board evaluation comes into use. For situations where a stalemate or a draw has occurred, a chosen best value is assigned. 

Function Humanturn: For the human player, each time his turn arises, he decides on a move. Then the move chosen is checked from the list given by the load function. If the input move of the player is incorrect, an error message is displayed. And the user is asked to make another input move. The correct move is displayed on the chess board through the move function. Special moves such as pawn promotion calls upon the human player to decide which chess piece it is being promoted to.  

Function load: this starts with deciding on a chess board setup, assigning a colour to each player through user input. The initial board is displayed and white player makes the first move. For the human player’s turn, a board iteration is called upon to find all the possible moves of the player’s chess pieces. Then the list is given to Humanturn function. For the computer player’s turn, minimaxPruned is called and a move is received. Then the move function makes the move on the board. After each player’s turn, the board is checked for a draw, stalemate or checkmate conditions.

Note: every time a move is made, the Pieces object moved on the board has its associated boolean functions changed if required. 

Use of System: To play the game, ChessPlay.java is to be run. The user is asked to type the name of the file input containing the chess board configuration via a scanner (The provided file Board.txt has the usual chess setup). Then he is to choose for the number of plies, then a colour to get its own side. Then there is an input of whether or not to keep the chess board as it is or manually reconfigure it for as much as he would like to. The chess game then starts with the white player. For the human player’s turn, a move can be made as such: if a piece is chosen, its current column number (example a) and row number (example b) are input in this order as an input value (ab). Then, new chosen spot column number and row number are input in this order as another input value on a second line (for example, a white pawn could be moved by typing 12 on the first line, then 13 on the second line). If the human player makes a move that is not legal, a message is output saying ‘Illegal move’ and is offered another chance to make a legal chess move. If the move is legal, a new board is output with the human’s chosen move having been carried out. After a human player’s turn, if the game can still go on, the computer makes a move and a new board will output, after the computer’s move has been made. The captured pieces by a player are kept at the player’s side of the board. The game will keep on going until either a draw or a checkmate or a stalemate or the 50-rule repetition is reached, and the final state of the game will be output. 

To note: if a human player wants to make a castling move (and it is legal), enter the king’s change in position first, the rook will be automatically moved.
